inpraCtiCe
Harvard Houses:
The Value of the Tutorial System
Harvard University’s residential col eges—living-learning communities where faculty, graduate students, and academic professionals live alongside undergraduates—provide unparal eled support by integrating the academic with the everyday.

By Suzy Nelson, Laura Johnson, and Lisa Boes
i
at harvard university, the broad goals of the fac-
ulty-led residential system mirror those of other living-
n AcADEMicALLy ADRiFT, richard arum
learning programs: to educate the “whole” student; to
and Josipa roksa argue that the rise of the research uni-
scale the larger university down to a more manageable
versity in america has widened the gap between fac-
size, where college services are readily accessible to stu-
ulty and students and has caused institutions of higher
dents; to create smaller, inclusive communities where
learning to “drift” from their main purpose of educating
peers of differing backgrounds can interact; to provide
undergraduates. reengaging faculty in students’ cocur-
social and academic support networks; to allow for the
ricular lives, especially in campus residential settings, is
informal interaction of undergraduates with faculty
one way to address this problem, and it anchors the col-
and other scholars and professionals; and to provide an
lege experience within the academic mission. in recent
enriching residential community. the harvard house
years, many institutions have developed residential liv-
system was conceived as a community that would not
ing-learning communities that aim to involve faculty
only allow seniors to mentor younger undergraduates,
in promoting peer-to-peer learning and furthering stu-
but for both to live with and learn from their instruc-
dents’ scholarly interests in a residential setting. a special
tors. while faculty involvement continues to be inte-
type of living-learning community—the residential col-
gral to the success of harvard’s houses, the tutorial
lege—has been embraced by many: harvard university;
system provides the backbone of residential life.

the university of California, santa Cruz; the university
tutors (called proctors if they live with first-year
of virginia; and the university of wisconsin–madison,
students) are graduate students or professionals affili-
to name a few. what sets residential colleges apart from
ated with the university. they live among students
other types of living-learning communities is that fac-
and provide personal and academic advising, respond
ulty members live, eat, and socialize with students in a
to students in distress, and address issues of miscon-
college residential setting. in importing oxbridge: English
duct. proctors and tutors serve as intellectual and
Residential col eges and American universities, alex duke
professional role models for students in residence and
noted that sharing a residential community helps forge
share their own interests, which range from medi-
a closer relationship between teacher and student that is
eval romance literatures to public health. By interact-
characteristic of a liberal arts education.

ing with students in a variety of ways—eating meals
Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)
© 2012 by American College Personnel Association and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/abc.21076
22
aBout Campus / may–June 2012
together in the dining halls, hosting weekly study break
ulars.” proctors and tutors also frequently refer to the
gatherings, and playing on intramural teams—proctors
rapport that develops between students and advisors. a
and tutors weave advising and intellectual mentorship
tutor notes, “students turn to tutors they trust, and
into students’ lives outside the classroom. they are also
that trust builds up through the hundreds of little inter-
often the first to notice signs of students in distress and
actions that tutors and students have each day.”
are called upon to enforce college policies and guide-
serving as residential advisors also contributes
lines.

to proctors’ and tutors’ professional development.

to prepare for these responsibilities, proctors and
tutors, most of whom are preparing for a career in
tutors participate in three days of training before the
academia, find the position gives them insight into
academic year begins, where they learn about the cur-
how the institution operates and how students learn,
riculum, academic requirements, college policies, safety
as well as an opportunity to develop leadership and
and wellness issues, and university resources available
professional skills. tutors indicate that their relation-
to students. they continue
ships with students help
their training throughout
them become more effec-
the year, attending college-
tive teachers: “advising
sponsored workshops and
students helped me build
the living-learning
house-based, faculty-run
my confidence as a gradu-
meetings to discuss top-
Community serves as an
ate student. this carries
ics such as study abroad,
over to my professional
undergraduate research,
eduCational environment
environment where i feel
supporting students in aca-
more comfortable with
for all involved—students
demic difficulty, and cul-
less structured question-
turally sensitive advising.

AND proCtors and tutors.

and-answer exchanges.”
while college-run
the living-learning com-
educational sessions convey
munity serves as an educa-
critical information, partic-
tional environment for all
ipating in the day-to-day lives of students provides an
involved—students and proctors and tutors.

invaluable perspective on their academic and cocur-
as is appropriate for students in transition, first-
ricular lives. one tutor claims that “conversations in
year students receive the greatest amount of residential
the dining hall, over study breaks, and at house events
support at harvard. first-year residences are divided
acculturates you to the rhythms of undergrad life in a
into “entryways” of 14–40 students. each entryway
way that is impossible to get if you’re not a resident.”
houses a proctor who serves as the academic advisor
another explains, “knowing students’ schedules, pri-
for six to ten students, approving course enrollment
orities, habits, interests, and personal situations is very
and other academic requirements. the other students
valuable in helping them in academics or extra-curric-
in the entryway work with nonresident first-year advi-
sors. proctors also provide supplemental advising to
the students served by nonresident advisors—especially
late at night and on the weekends, when nonresident
advisors can be more difficult to reach. Because proc-
Suzy Nelson, phd, is the dean of student life at harvard tors support students during a time of adjustment often
College and oversees the residential house system, public
service programming, diversity initiatives, the women’s
characterized by intense feelings of excitement and
Center, and student life and activities.

vulnerability, they forge close relationships with their
Laura Johnson, phd, is the allston Burr resident dean of students. these close relationships make it easier for
Currier house and a lecturer on women, gender, and sexual-
proctors to pass along their knowledge about the cur-
ity studies at harvard College, where she has also served as
riculum and cocurricular opportunities. on a recent
assistant dean of advising programs.

midyear survey of advising, one first-year student
Lisa Boes, edd, is the allston Burr resident dean of wrote, “having had my proctor serve as my academic
pforzheimer house and a lecturer on social studies at
advisor as well has been very helpful due to the extra
harvard College, where she also has help positions at
familiarity it affords. i scheduled a few additional meet-
the derek Bok Center for teaching & learning and the
ings with [my proctor] when i was having some dif-
advising programs office.

ficulty choosing among a few courses, and his practical
we love feedback. send letters to executive editor Jean m.

and long-range advice was immensely useful to me.

henscheid (aboutcampus@pdx.edu), and please copy her on
notes to authors.

he was happy to meet with me as often as i felt neces-
23
aBout Campus / may–June 2012
sary and referred me to the additional sources i needed
my entryway—not just his own assigned students—for
to craft my schedule and look to potential winter and
anything we need.”
summer plans.”
first-year students provide feedback about proc-
peer advising fellows (pafs) provide an added
tors and pafs twice per year, on a midyear and end-of-
layer of advising and mentorship for first-year stu-
year survey. one question asks students to describe the
dents within the living-learning community. pafs
most helpful aspect of first-year orientation. first-year
are upper-class students who advise first-year students
students point repeatedly to the group and individual
on academic, residential, and extracurricular life.

advising meetings and social events run by proctors
each entryway has three or four pafs assigned to it,
and pafs. Comments like the following from mem-
depending on the number of students in the entry-
bers of the Class of 2014 are common: “the entryway
way. the pafs work individually with their assigned
meetings where our proctor gave us a big rundown of
advisees, and they also work as a team with the proc-
shopping week and academic and class expectations”
tor to build community within the entryway, helping
and “we had a meeting with our paf as a group in
run the weekly study breaks and arranging outings
which we continued to get to know each other and
and other events for the
she talk[ed] about course
first-year students. while
selection. i remember feel-
pafs are affiliated with
ing totally unprepared and
an entryway, which has
confused [. . .], but after
most tellingly, students
been instrumental in the
having this group meet-
success of the program,
rated proCtors
ing, my paf, [. . .], clari-
they do not live within
fied so many points for me
the entryway—they live
signifiCantly higher than
and made me feel so much
in the upper-class houses.

more confident going into
nonresident advisors
unlike the proctors, they
the start of the semester.”
d o n o t r e c e i v e r o o m
when asked aBout the
strikingly, while non-
and board. instead, they
resident first-year advisors
receive a small stipend
overall helpfulness of
perform well overall on
for their work. pafs, like
evaluations, resident advi-
their advisors.

proctors, undergo exten-
sors consistently outper-
sive training, with an all-
form them. in their praise
day session in the spring,
of resident advisors, stu-
t w o f u l l - d a y s e s s i o n s
dents point repeatedly to
before the fall term starts, and monthly meetings with
proctors’ accessibility and to their deep knowledge of
the staff from the advising programs office who hire
undergraduate academic and student life—gained, we
and supervise them.

would argue, from living and working in proximity
pafs enable first-year students to take advantage
to first-year students. for instance, on the 2010–2011
of opportunities earlier than they otherwise might.

midyear survey, proctor-advisors were rated higher on
they meet students regularly, and they get to know
a four-point likert scale than nonresident advisors on
their academic and long-term interests. pafs are
all ten questions evaluating academic advising, and that
already familiar with campus resources, so they help
difference was statistically significant for nine out of
the first-years connect with labs and other research
the ten questions. the questions addressed availability,
opportunities, internships, public service and study-
assistance balancing academic and cocurricular com-
abroad programs, and relevant upper-level depart-
mitments, making helpful suggestions should a student
mental courses. with around 2,000 courses available
encounter academic challenges, and comfort in turning
to undergraduates, the Course Catalogue can bewil-
to the advisor for information and advice. most tell-
der first-year students, and pafs help them to navi-
ingly, students rated proctors significantly higher than
gate it more successfully. one first-year student wrote
nonresident advisors when asked about the overall
recently of a paf, “it’s so helpful to be able to talk
helpfulness of their advisors (3.38 vs. 3.07).

to someone who’s already gone through his freshman
after their first year, harvard students move from the
year and who can give me an idea of what to expect
first-year residences into one of the houses. there they
from a student’s perspective. [my paf] is incredible;
interact with tutors in a variety of ways. in addition to
he really helped me with choosing classes and plan-
serving as a residential advisor to 25–40 students in their
ning, and he makes himself available to everyone in
entryway, resident tutors are assigned by interests and
24
aBout Campus / may–June 2012
academic field to serve as the primary academic advisor
while a residential tutorial system has many
for four to eight sophomores. this design provides critical
strengths, there are also potential shortcomings. first,
support for students who are stil exploring academic fields
it is expensive, as tutors and proctors receive room
and developing relationships with faculty in the depart-
and board in exchange for their work. second, these
ments. sophomore advisors support students as they make
positions are reserved for graduate students, which
two significant transitions: moving into the house where
denies this learning opportunity and financial benefit to
they wil live for three years and selecting a concentration
undergraduate residential advisors. further, this work
near the end of their third term.

is time-intensive and may impede graduate students’
as academic advisors, tutors help students to
progress to degree completion. third, because the
select courses that balance exploration with require-
house system is more akin to a federation of residen-
ments and to consider opportunities such as study
tial departments, in a similar way that academic depart-
abroad, research internships, and secondary field
ments make up a university, maintaining consistency of
c h o i c e . B e c a u s e t h e y
advising services is a chal-
develop relationships as
lenge. to address the lat-
part of living together in
ter, guidelines for personal,
the residential commu-
professional, and academic
emBedding the aCademiC
nity, sophomore advisors
advising have been devel-
are able to mentor stu-
advising program in a
oped to direct practice.

dents in other areas, such
in-service workshops also
as interpersonal relation-
residential setting provides
reinforce goals and expec-
ships, integrity and personal
tations. finally, the tuto-
Both struCtured and
responsibility, and explor-
rial system is an intimate
ing identity. students rate
informal opportunities
one, and some students
the quality of their house
may feel less comfortable
advising experience highly.

for more eXperienCed
talking about personal and
they find that advisors are
academic challenges with a
sCholars to develop
responsive, make an effort
graduate student who lives
to get to know them, and
relationships with students
nearby. for this reason,
are able to address ques-
centralized services, such
tions and concerns. in
and to advise them.

as the office of Career
2010, 91 percent of stu-
services, need to serve as
dents reported being sat-
an able companion to the
isfied with the quality of
house tutorial system.

their sophomore advising experience in the house ( n
these limitations aside, tutors and proctors create a
= 1,034; mean = 3.29 on four-point scale).

safe harbor for student development by engaging with
embedding the academic advising program in a
students over meals and during study breaks, through
residential setting provides both structured and infor-
formal advising meetings, and most especially through
mal opportunities for more experienced scholars to
their day-to-day presence in residence.

develop relationships with students and to advise them.

informally, advisors and students live together, share
meals, and attend social and intellectual events in the
notes
house. they meet formally to discuss and approve
course selections and plans of study. this unique rela-
arum, r., & roksa, J. (2011). Academically adrift: Limited tionship embodies the connection between the intel-learning on college campuses. Chicago, il: university of
Chicago press.

lectual and social goals of the institution, as advisors
duke, a. (1996). importing oxbridge: English residential colleges
serve as role models and look out for the overall well-
and American universities. new haven, Ct, and london,
being and growth of students.

uk: yale university press.

25
aBout Campus / may–June 2012
Copyright of About Campus is the property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.

However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.



